Sync CNV runbook GuestVCPUQueueHighCritical.md (Updated at 2025-08-10 09:17:19 +0000 UTC) (#314)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/openshift-virtualization-operator/GuestVCPUQueueHighCritical.md

# GuestVCPUQueueHighCritical

## Meaning
A VirtualMachineInstance (VMI) reported a
**guest CPU run‑queue length greater than 20** runnable or
uninterruptible threads within the last scrape window (120s),
indicating severe CPU contention.

## Impact
* Sustained backlog; high latency and throughput degradation are likely.
* Risk of timeouts, watchdog resets, or I/O amplification.

## Diagnosis
Follow the below steps with extra focus on:
* **Duration** – How long is the queue > 20
* **Host saturation** - if node CPU is also > 90%, migrate other VMs or
  mark the node as unschedulable so that no new Pods/VMs are placed thereon it.

1. **Confirm queue length**
   ```promql
   kubevirt_vmi_guest_vcpu_queue{namespace="$NS",name="$VM"}
   ```
2. **Check host CPU usage**
   ```promql
   rate(kubevirt_vmi_cpu_usage_seconds_total{namespace="$NS",name="$VM"}[2m])
   ```
3. **Inspect guest processes**
   `virtctl console <vm>` → `top -H` or `pidstat -u 1`
4. **Verify vCPU allocation**
   ```bash
   oc get vmi $VM -ojsonpath='{.spec.domain.cpu}'
   ```

## Mitigation

> | Horizon  | Action                                                           |
> |----------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
> | Immediate| **Prioritise**: live-migrate VM; hot-plug vCPUs; stop or throttle |
> |          | hot threads.                                                   |
> | Short term| Raise vCPU limit or split workload across additional VMs.       |
> | Long term| Adjust placement rules; add autoscaling tied to run-queue length.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Immediately: Live-migrate VM, hot-plug vCPUs, stop or throttle hot threads.
* Short term: Raise vCPU limit or split workload across additional VMs.
* Long term: Adjust placement rules; add autoscaling tied to run-queue length.
```
Seems like a simpler, cleaner solution^.
